Viem tutorial for interacting with RSK contracts (#313)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/04-resources/04-tutorials/rootstock-viem.md

---
sidebar_label:  Interacting with Rootstock using Viem
sidebar_position: 2
title:  Interacting with Rootstock using Viem

> description: 'Viem offers a minimalist and performant TypeScript alternative to Ethers.js and Web3.js for frontends to interact with deployed contracts when building dApps. This guide will teach developers how to use Viem when building for RSK.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Viem offers a minimalist TypeScript alternative to Ethers.js and Web3.js to interact with deployed contracts when building dApps on the frontend. This guide will teach developers how to use Viem when building for Rootstock.'
```

tags: [rsk, rootstock, tutorials, resources, frontend, smart contracts, dapps, viem]
---

> [Viem](https://viem.sh/) offers a minimalist, lightweight, and more efficient Typescript interface alternative to [Ethers.js](https://docs.ethers.org/v5/) and [Web3.js](https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/v1.10.0/) for interacting with Ethereum nodes. It maintains a bundle size of 35KB compared to Ethers and Web3.js, which are over 300KB and 600KB, respectively. Viem also offers more granular control over APIs in contrast to Ethers.js, which abstracts APIs for more functionalities. 

Reviewer: What's the importance of a bundle size? If possible, please link a resource differentiating why its better than Ethers and web3.js

Author: That would be speed and responsiveness. I'll add a sentence. Thanks.

> This tutorial will teach you how to use Viem to interact with your RSK contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will teach you how to use Viem to interact with your contracts on Rootstock.
```

## Installation and Setup

> In this guide, you will learn how you can interact with an existing lending contract on the RSK Explorer, [rLending RBTC](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/address/0xc19f0882bf318c9f8767c7d520018888e878417b).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you will learn how to interact with an existing lending contract on the Rootstock Explorer, [rLending RBTC](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/address/0xc19f0882bf318c9f8767c7d520018888e878417b).
```

Use the following command to install the Viem npm package:

```bash
npm install viem
```

For more installation options, you can check out the official [installation guide](https://viem.sh/docs/installation).

## Using the Public Client

> You would need to set up your Client in Viem, which would have been your `Provider` in a typical Ethers.js project.

Reviewer: Am I creating a folder, a file or using an existing project at this point? Its not clear where the public client should be used

Author: I'll clarify that in the next commit.

```ts
import { createPublicClient, http } from 'viem'
import { rootstockTestnet } from 'viem/chains';

const RPC_URL = process.env.RPC_URL;
 
const publicClient = createPublicClient({ 
  chain: rootstockTestnet, 
  transport: http(RPC_URL), 
}) 
```

**In the above code:** 

> - You need to define a `Chain` and `Transport` for RSK-specific values. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need to define a `Chain` and `Transport` for Rootstock-specific values. 
```

> - Chain values for the RSK chain could be `rootstock` for the mainnet or `rootstockTestnet` for the Testnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Chain values for the Rootstock chain could be `rootstock` for the mainnet or `rootstockTestnet` for the Testnet
```

> - Your `RPC_URL` is best set as an environmental variable whose value can be obtained from the RSK [RPC API dashboard](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is recommended to set your `RPC_URL` as an environmental variable whose value can be obtained from the Rootstock [RPC API dashboard](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/).
```

```
RPC_URL='https://rpc.testnet.rootstock.io/<API_KEY>'
CONTRACT_ADDRESS='0x...' // You can also add the contract address as an environment variable 
```

**NB:** If you are working on a Next.js project, environment variables must be prepended with `NEXT_PUBLIC_` as `NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL` for the RPC URL variable.

> You access a deployed contract with its ABI using the Viem's `getContract` method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access a deployed contract with its ABI using the Viem's `getContract` method. 
```

if (typeof window === 'undefined' || typeof window.ethereum === 'undefined') {
  throw new Error('MetaMask not detected');
}

export const walletClient = createWalletClient({
	chain: rootstockTestnet,
	transport: custom(window.ethereum!)
})

const [walletAddresses] = await walletClient.getAddresses()
```

You have to explicitly make TypeScript aware that `window.ethereum` exists. It is not part of the standard `Window` library but is injected by browser wallets like MetaMask. Create a file called `global.d.ts` in the utils folder and add the following code to it.

```ts
interface Window {
  ethereum?: any
}
```

Then, you can use the `writeContract` method to make state-changing function calls like the `borrow` function to borrow tokens from the lending protocol:

```ts
export async function borrow(amount: bigint): Promise<`0x${string}`> {
	if (!walletClient) throw new Error("Wallet client not available.");
	const account = await getConnectedAccount();

	const txHash = await walletClient.writeContract({
		address: CONTRACT_ADDRESS,
		abi: profileContractAbi,
		functionName: 'borrow',
		args: [amount],
		account,
	});

	return txHash;
}
```

### Simulating Transactions

> It helps to do a dry run of your state-changing functions first to catch errors and see if something fails before the real transaction. You can use the `simulateContract()` feature, which does not spend gas. Doing a simulation prevents blindly sending a transaction that could be gas-costly. It also helps you to catch and return human-readable revert reasons if provided in the smart contract via `require()` or `revert()`. The following snippet shows how to simulate a transaction before performing the actual transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It helps to do a dry run of your state-changing functions first to catch errors and see if something fails before the real transaction. You can use the `simulateContract()` feature, which does not spend gas. Performing a simulation prevents sending a transaction that could cost more gas fees. It also helps you to detect and return human-readable revert reasons if provided in the smart contract via `require()` or `revert()`. The following code snippet shows how to simulate a transaction before performing the actual transaction.
```

```ts
// Simulate transaction
const { request } = await publicClient.simulateContract({
    address: getAddress(CONTRACT_ADDRESS),
    abi: profileContractAbi,
    functionName: 'borrow',
    args: [amount],
    account,
});

// Send real transaction only if simulation succeeded
const txHash = await walletClient.writeContract(request);

return txHash;
```

> Resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Resources:
```

> - [Full working demo code](https://github.com/entuziaz/rsk-viem-demo) 

Reviewer: @entuziaz This repo is private and should be referenced at the start of the guide. There's also no example responses for the code snippet making it hard to understand what the reader should be expecting if going through the guide

Author: I've just made the repo public and referenced it in the installation and setup section, much closer to the top. 
About sample responses: I have added sample responses expected for the code snippets.

Reviewer: Noted. Thank you
